content/projects.md, before:

---
title: Projects
date:  2023-05-01
hide:  true
---

## The Social Network of the Future (2023)

We are in the process of creating a social network based on what we've learned
from our experiments during the past years:
[The Social Network of the Future](https://social-protocols.org/social-network/)
([Github](https://github.com/social-protocols/social-network)) The core of our
concepts is the
[Global Brain Algorithm](https://social-protocols.org/global-brain), which
converts a social network into a distributed brain, resulting in a whole that is
more intelligent than the individual human parts.

## Quality News (2021)

[**Quality News**](https://news.social-protocols.org/) is a Hacker News client
that provides additional data and insights on Hacker News submissions, notably,
the **upvoteRate** metric. The **upvoteRate** is designed to better reflect the
intent of the community as revealed by their upvote behavior. We believe this
calculation can be a key component in the design of social protocols. See the
[readme on GitHub](https://github.com/social-protocols/news#readme) for details.

---

# Archived Projects

## Propolis (2023)

[**Propolis**](https://github.com/social-protocols/propolis), inspired by
[Polis](https://pol.is), is an attempt to create a scaling collective
intelligence system based on asking and answering yes-no questions.
Propolis was archived because it was superseded by **The Social Network of the Future**.

Commit message:

update projects and social-network pages

content/projects.md, after:

---
title: Projects
date:  2023-05-01
hide:  true
---

## Jabble (2023)

We are in the process of creating a social media platform based on what we've learned
from our experiments during the past years:
([Jabble](https://github.com/social-protocols/social-network)) based on our [Global Brain Algorithm](https://social-protocols.org/global-brain), which
converts a social media platform into a distributed brain, resulting in a whole that is
more intelligent than the individual human parts.

## Quality News (2021)

[**Quality News**](https://news.social-protocols.org/) is a Hacker News client
that provides additional data and insights on Hacker News submissions, notably,
the **upvoteRate** metric. The **upvoteRate** is designed to better reflect the
intent of the community as revealed by their upvote behavior. We believe this
calculation can be a key component in the design of social protocols. See the
[readme on GitHub](https://github.com/social-protocols/news#readme) for details.

---

# Archived Projects

## Propolis (2023)

[**Propolis**](https://github.com/social-protocols/propolis), inspired by
[Polis](https://pol.is), is an attempt to create a scaling collective
intelligence system based on asking and answering yes-no questions.
Propolis was archived because it was superseded by **Jabble**.
