content/social-network.md, before:

---
title: We're Building the Social Network of the Future
site: distill::distill_website
date: 2023-10-23
---

We are in the process of creating a social network based on what we've learned
from our experiments during the past years. The core of our concepts is a suite
of novel algorithms that distribute attention over content. Unlike most social
networking platforms, we do **not** optimize for engagement. Instead, we aim to
distribute attention in such a way that we enable large-scale productive
discussions with outputs that are more intelligent than the sum of their parts.

## Follow our Progress

As of right now, we haven't launched the platform yet. However, we are
developing in the open. You can follow our progress on
[Github](https://github.com/social-protocols/social-network).

We are also trying to document our ideas in a comprehensive way. If you are
interested in the concepts behind our algorithms, visit
[our documentation](https://github.com/social-protocols/global-brain). Be aware,
though, that this document changes all the time and is incomplete (and will be
for a while).

Our code is free and open source and our ideas are in the public domain. If you
want to use any of our code or ideas in your project, we encourage you to do so.
We are aware that our goals are very ambitious, maybe even delusional. But if
our ideas actually make sense, we don't care if it's us that delivers the
product. If you can make them work better than us, we would consider that a win.

## Get Notified when we Launch

If you want to be among the first to join, subscribe to our newsletter. We won't
bother you with regular marketing mails. Instead, we will send out a
notification whenever we've reached an important milestone.

<script async src="https://eocampaign1.com/form/f47f2128-8ee6-11ee-ba9b-95c483a0d02d.js" data-form="f47f2128-8ee6-11ee-ba9b-95c483a0d02d"></script>

Commit message:

update projects and social-network pages

content/social-network.md, after:

---
title: "We're Building Jabble: Social Media from the Future"
site: distill::distill_website
date: 2023-10-23
---

We are in the process of creating a social media platform based on what we've learned
from our experiments during the past years. The core of our concepts is a suite
of novel algorithms that distribute attention over content. Unlike most social
media platforms, we do **not** optimize for engagement. Instead, we aim to
distribute attention in such a way that we enable large-scale productive
discussions with outputs that are more intelligent than the sum of their parts.

## Follow our Progress

As of right now, we haven't launched the platform yet. However, we are
developing in the open. You can follow our progress on
[Github](https://github.com/social-protocols/jabble).

We are also trying to document our ideas in a comprehensive way. If you are
interested in the concepts behind our algorithms, visit
[our documentation](https://github.com/social-protocols/global-brain). Be aware,
though, that this document changes all the time and is incomplete (and will be
for a while).

Our code is free and open source and our ideas are in the public domain. If you
want to use any of our code or ideas in your project, we encourage you to do so.
We are aware that our goals are very ambitious, maybe even delusional. But if
our ideas actually make sense, we don't care if it's us who deliver the
product. If you can make them work better than us, we would consider that a win.

## Get Notified when we Launch

If you want to be among the first to join, subscribe to our newsletter. We won't
bother you with regular marketing mails. Instead, we will send out a
notification once we launched and whenever we've reached an important milestone.

<script async src="https://eocampaign1.com/form/f47f2128-8ee6-11ee-ba9b-95c483a0d02d.js" data-form="f47f2128-8ee6-11ee-ba9b-95c483a0d02d"></script>
